Linear logic has been used in the past as a basis for logic-based programming
languages~\cite{Miller85anoverview}, including forwards-chaining and
backwards-chaining programming languages.
LinLog~\cite{Andreoli92logicprogramming} is a backwards-chaining programming
language that originated from the idea of using focused proofs as a basis for a
programming language. Focused proofs are tractable since most irrelevant
choices in during search are removed from the sequent calculus, making them
ideal for a programming language. The semantics presented for LM also use
focusing as a basis for developing the high level semantics and relating the
operational semantics with linear logic.

Lolli, a programming language presented in~\cite{Hodas94logicprogramming}, is
based on a fragment of intuitionistic linear logic and proves goals by lazily
managing the context of linear resources during backwards-chaining proof search.
LolliMon~\cite{Lopez:2005:MCL:1069774.1069778} is a concurrent linear logic
programming language that integrates both forward-chaining and
backwards-chaining search, where forward-chaining computations are encapsulated
inside a monad and are concurrent, while backwards-chaining search is done
sequentially. The programs starts by performing backwards-chaining search but
this can be suspended in order to perform forward-chaining search. This
concurrent forward-chaining search stops until a fix-point is achieved, after
which backwards-chaining search is resumed. LolliMon is derived from the a
concurrent logical framework called
CLF~\cite{Watkins:2004uq,Cervesato02aconcurrent,Watkins03aconcurrent}.
